README
========================================================

This README contains a detailed description of the script *run_analysis.R*, including the data used to perform this analysis, a list of all relevant files, details of every step taken to perform this analysis, and a dicussion of coding and other decisions made along the way. This analysis and related files were prepared for the course project for the Coursera course Getting & Cleaning Data.

## The Original Dataset

The dataset used for this project was the *Human Activity Recognition (HAR) Using Smartphones Dataset* generated by Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz, Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, and Luca Oneto at *Smartlab - Non Linear Complex Systems Laboratory* at Università degli Studi di Genova. The dataset was obtained from the [UCI Machine Learning Repository website](http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones "UCI Human Activity Recognition Dataset"). The dataset itself was downloaded [here](https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip "UCI HAR Dataset.zip").

The data was generated by an experiment, which was described in the README file of the original dataset as follows:
> The experiments have been carried out with a group of 30 volunteers within an age bracket of 19-48 years. Each person performed six activities (WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, we captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz. The experiments have been video-recorded to label the data manually. The obtained dataset has been randomly partitioned into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers was selected for generating the training data and 30% the test data.

## List of Files

Below is a list of raw data files contained in *UCI HAR Dataset.zip* as described in the dataset's README. More detailed information about specific variables can be found in CodeBook.md.
> - 'README.txt'
> - 'features_info.txt': Shows information about the variables used on the feature vector.
> - 'features.txt': List of all features.
> - 'activity_labels.txt': Links the class labels with their activity name.
> - 'train/X_train.txt': Training set.
> - 'train/y_train.txt': Training labels.
> - 'test/X_test.txt': Test set.
> - 'test/y_test.txt': Test labels.
>
>The following files are available for the train and test data. Their descriptions are equivalent. 
> - 'train/subject_train.txt': Each row identifies the subject who performed the activity for each window sample. Its range is from 1 to 30. 
> - 'train/Inertial Signals/total_acc_x_train.txt': The acceleration signal from the smartphone accelerometer X axis in standard gravity units 'g'. Every row shows a 128 element vector. The same description applies for the 'total_acc_x_train.txt' and 'total_acc_z_train.txt' files for the Y and Z axis. 
> - 'train/Inertial Signals/body_acc_x_train.txt': The body acceleration signal obtained by subtracting the gravity from the total acceleration. 
> - 'train/Inertial Signals/body_gyro_x_train.txt': The angular velocity vector measured by the gyroscope for each window sample. The units are radians/second. 

The files generated for this project are:
- README.md
- CodeBook.md: detailed descriptions of variables, output dataset, and any transformations applied to the raw data
- run_analysis.R: R script used to obtain UCI HAR Dataset and prepare the data for analysis
- Mean.of.features.tidy.txt: the output of run_analysis.R, a tidy dataset containing the mean values of a subset of feature variables for every unique combination of subject and activity


## Description of run_analysis.R script

The run_analysis.R script downloads and unzips the UCI HAR Dataset; loads raw data files; combines datasets to create a master data frames; assigns descriptive variable names and activity labels; extracts variables containing mean and standard deviation measurements; and creates a new dataset containing the means of these variables for every unique combination of activity and subject ID.

More specifically, the R script contained in run_analysis.R performs these steps in the following order:

1. Load the libraries 'utils' and 'reshape2'.
2. Checks if the user has already downloaded the *UCI HAR Dataset.zip* file and then downloads the file if the user has not already done so
3. Checks if the user has already unzipped the *UCI HAR Dataset.zip* file and then unzips the file if the user has not already done so
4. Reads in data file containing feature names and removes any special characters from feature names so that they are easily readable in R
5. Reads in data file containing the descriptive activity labels that correpond to each factor level
6. Reads in files containing X and Y variables and subject IDs for test dataset and combines them to create full test dataset
7. Repeats the step above for training dataset
8. Combines test and training datasets to create full dataset
9. Replaces the integer activity IDs with descriptive activity names
10. Identifies variables that contain mean or standard deviation measurements, then creates a new dataset that includes these variables as well as subject IDs and activities
11. Melts and re-casts this dataset to create a new dataset containing the mean values of each variable for every unique combination of activity and subject id
12. Writes this output dataset to a text file


## More information
The purpose of this project is to prepare the raw data contained in the UCI HAR Dataset for analysis. The raw data consist of readings from smart phone accelerometers and gyroscopes collected while volunteers performed specific activites. To prepare this data for analysis, the script above summarizes the specific accelerometer and gyroscope readings generated by each subject while performing each activity. This tidy data set could be used to fit a model that predicts what activity a cell phone user is performing based on the accelerometer and gyroscope readings. A model like this would have many uses. Imagine, for example, a fitness app that could automatically track how frequently a user goes running or count the number of situps a user performs. For more on the implications of wearable computing and the potential uses of the data generated by these devices, see this article about [data science and activity tracking](http://www.insideactivitytracking.com/data-science-activity-tracking-and-the-battle-for-the-worlds-top-sports-brand/ "Activity Tracking and the Battle for the World's Top Sports Brand").
